README.md, before:

# Penpot Wizard

An AI-powered chat assistant plugin for Penpot that uses a multi-agent architecture to help with design tasks, provide guidance, and create designs directly in projects.

## Table of Contents

- [What is Penpot Wizard?](#what-is-penpot-wizard)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  - [Installation](#installation)
  - [Configure API Keys](#configure-api-keys)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Extending the Plugin](#extending-the-plugin)
  - [Agents](#agents)
  - [Tools](#tools)
  - [RAG Tools](#rag-tools)
  - [Plugin Communication](#plugin-communication)
  - [Shape Reference](#shape-reference)
  - [Path Commands](#path-commands)
- [Development](#development)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [License & Contributing](#license--contributing)

---

## What is Penpot Wizard?

Penpot Wizard is a plugin for [Penpot](https://penpot.app) that brings AI assistance into your design workflow. It includes:

- **Multi-Agent Architecture**: Director agents orchestrate coordinators, specialized agents, and tools
- **AI Integration**: Supports OpenAI and OpenRouter
- **RAG System**: Search Penpot documentation and design styles
- **Direct Drawing**: Create shapes, paths, text, boards, components, and icons in Penpot
- **Chat Interface**: Streaming responses, conversation history, multiple agents

---

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18 or higher
- npm or yarn
- OpenAI API key or OpenRouter API key
- Penpot account

### Installation

1. **Clone and install**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd penpot-wizard
   npm install
   ```

2. **Build for Penpot**
   ```bash
   npm run dev:penpot
   ```
   This builds the plugin and watches for UI changes. The UI is served at `http://localhost:5174`.

3. **Load the plugin in Penpot**
   - Open Penpot and go to a project
   - Menu → Plugins → Manage plugins
   - Install from file
   - Select the `dist` folder from this project

### Configure API Keys

- Click the settings icon in the plugin
- Enter your OpenAI or OpenRouter API key
- Click "Check API Keys" and select a model from the dropdown

---

## Architecture

The system has three layers: the **Plugin** (runs in Penpot, creates shapes, accesses data), the **UI** (React app in an iframe), and **Stores** (nanostores for state). Director agents orchestrate tools, coordinators, specialized agents, and image-generation agents. Communication between UI and plugin uses `postMessage`.

See [docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) for diagrams and details.

---

## Extending the Plugin

### Agents

There are three agent types: **Director** (main orchestrator), **Coordinator** (project orchestration), and **Specialized** (domain experts). Each has its own file in `src/assets/`. Image generation and placement are handled by tools (`generate-image`, `set-image-from-url`) in `imageTools.js`. Agents use `toolIds` and `specializedAgentIds` to compose tools and sub-agents.

See [docs/AGENTS_GUIDE.md](docs/AGENTS_GUIDE.md) for how to create custom agents.

### Tools

Tools are defined in `src/assets/` (functionTools, toolsCreateShapes, toolsModifyShapes, toolsCompoundShapes, toolsLayoutShapes, toolsInteractions, toolsFlows, toolsReorderShapes, toolsTokens, ragTools, iconsTool). All tools share the structure: `id`, `name`, `description`, `inputSchema`, `function`. Shape tools include create-rectangle, create-ellipse, create-text, create-path, create-board, modify-*, create-boolean, group-shapes, align-shapes, interactions, flows, design tokens (get/create/modify/apply), draw-icon, and more.

See [docs/EXTENDING_TOOLS.md](docs/EXTENDING_TOOLS.md) for how to add new tools.

### RAG Tools

RAG tools search vector databases (Orama) for documentation. Databases are generated by [orama-persistence-generator](https://github.com/axelseis/orama-persistence-generator) and placed in `public/`. Existing RAGs: penpot-user-guide, design-styles. Embedding models: Orama (browser) or OpenAI (precomputed).

See [docs/CREATING_RAGS.md](docs/CREATING_RAGS.md) for creating and adding RAG tools.

### Plugin Communication

The UI sends queries via `postMessage` using `ClientQueryType`. Handlers live in `mainHandlers.js` and `drawHandlers/` (folder with specialized handlers). To add a new operation: define a ClientQueryType, implement a handler, and create a tool that calls `sendMessageToPlugin`.

See [docs/PLUGIN_COMMUNICATION.md](docs/PLUGIN_COMMUNICATION.md) for the full protocol and examples.

### Shape Reference

Shapes use schemas from `src/types/shapeTypes.js`: fills (color, gradient, image), strokes, shadows, blur, flex/grid layouts. Key rule: create foreground elements first, backgrounds last. Types: rectangle, ellipse, path, text.

See [docs/SHAPE_REFERENCE.md](docs/SHAPE_REFERENCE.md) for schema details.

### Path Commands

Path shapes use a `content` array of commands (M, L, H, V, C, S, Q, T, A, Z). Use `pathCommandsToSvgString()` in the plugin to convert to SVG.

See [docs/PATH_COMMANDS_GUIDE.md](docs/PATH_COMMANDS_GUIDE.md) for syntax and examples.

---

## Development

Scripts: `npm run dev` (UI only), `npm run dev:penpot` (plugin + watch), `npm run build`, `npm run test`, `npm run lint`. Project structure: `src/assets` (agents, tools), `src/plugin` (Penpot handlers), `src/stores` (state), `src/types` (schemas).

See [docs/DEVELOPMENT.md](docs/DEVELOPMENT.md) for full setup and structure.

---

## Troubleshooting

| Issue | Solution |
|-------|----------|
| **"Not connected"** | Check API key, click "Check API Keys", verify credits |
| **Streaming stops** | Check network, rate limits, reload plugin |
| **Tool not available** | Verify tool ID in agent's `toolIds`, reload plugin |
| **RAG returns nothing** | Ensure .zip in `public/`, use specific English queries |
| **Path drawing error** | Use valid path commands, ensure `Z` has no params; see [PATH_COMMANDS_GUIDE.md](docs/PATH_COMMANDS_GUIDE.md) |
| **Plugin not loading** | Rebuild with `npm run build`, check `dist/`, re-add plugin in Penpot |

---

## Resources

- [Penpot Plugin API](https://help.penpot.app/technical-guide/plugins/)
- [Vercel AI SDK](https://sdk.vercel.ai/docs)
- [nanostores](https://github.com/nanostores/nanostores)
- [Orama](https://docs.oramasearch.com/)
- [Zod](https://zod.dev/)

---

## License & Contributing

This project is licensed under the MIT License. For contributions, please read the contribution guidelines and submit pull requests.

Commit message:

Add deployment links to README
Add "Try it Out" section with links to the project website
(aipenpotwizard.app), the free hosted version on Vercel, and
installation instructions.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01DGmF7CXCNCw6bzPhZwdLm8

README.md, after:

# Penpot Wizard

An AI-powered chat assistant plugin for Penpot that uses a multi-agent architecture to help with design tasks, provide guidance, and create designs directly in projects.

## Table of Contents

- [What is Penpot Wizard?](#what-is-penpot-wizard)
- [Try it Out](#try-it-out)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  - [Installation](#installation)
  - [Configure API Keys](#configure-api-keys)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Extending the Plugin](#extending-the-plugin)
  - [Agents](#agents)
  - [Tools](#tools)
  - [RAG Tools](#rag-tools)
  - [Plugin Communication](#plugin-communication)
  - [Shape Reference](#shape-reference)
  - [Path Commands](#path-commands)
- [Development](#development)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Resources](#resources)
- [License & Contributing](#license--contributing)

---

## What is Penpot Wizard?

Penpot Wizard is a plugin for [Penpot](https://penpot.app) that brings AI assistance into your design workflow. It includes:

- **Multi-Agent Architecture**: Director agents orchestrate coordinators, specialized agents, and tools
- **AI Integration**: Supports OpenAI and OpenRouter
- **RAG System**: Search Penpot documentation and design styles
- **Direct Drawing**: Create shapes, paths, text, boards, components, and icons in Penpot
- **Chat Interface**: Streaming responses, conversation history, multiple agents

---

## Try it Out

We have a small website explaining the project at **[aipenpotwizard.app](https://aipenpotwizard.app/)**.

A **free hosted version** of the plugin is available at **[penpot-ai-wizard-plugin-website.vercel.app](https://penpot-ai-wizard-plugin-website.vercel.app/)** — no local setup required.

For installation instructions, visit **[aipenpotwizard.app/install](https://aipenpotwizard.app/install.html)**.

---

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18 or higher
- npm or yarn
- OpenAI API key or OpenRouter API key
- Penpot account

### Installation

1. **Clone and install**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd penpot-wizard
   npm install
   ```

2. **Build for Penpot**
   ```bash
   npm run dev:penpot
   ```
   This builds the plugin and watches for UI changes. The UI is served at `http://localhost:5174`.

3. **Load the plugin in Penpot**
   - Open Penpot and go to a project
   - Menu → Plugins → Manage plugins
   - Install from file
   - Select the `dist` folder from this project

### Configure API Keys

- Click the settings icon in the plugin
- Enter your OpenAI or OpenRouter API key
- Click "Check API Keys" and select a model from the dropdown

---

## Architecture

The system has three layers: the **Plugin** (runs in Penpot, creates shapes, accesses data), the **UI** (React app in an iframe), and **Stores** (nanostores for state). Director agents orchestrate tools, coordinators, specialized agents, and image-generation agents. Communication between UI and plugin uses `postMessage`.

See [docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) for diagrams and details.

---

## Extending the Plugin

### Agents

There are three agent types: **Director** (main orchestrator), **Coordinator** (project orchestration), and **Specialized** (domain experts). Each has its own file in `src/assets/`. Image generation and placement are handled by tools (`generate-image`, `set-image-from-url`) in `imageTools.js`. Agents use `toolIds` and `specializedAgentIds` to compose tools and sub-agents.

See [docs/AGENTS_GUIDE.md](docs/AGENTS_GUIDE.md) for how to create custom agents.

### Tools

Tools are defined in `src/assets/` (functionTools, toolsCreateShapes, toolsModifyShapes, toolsCompoundShapes, toolsLayoutShapes, toolsInteractions, toolsFlows, toolsReorderShapes, toolsTokens, ragTools, iconsTool). All tools share the structure: `id`, `name`, `description`, `inputSchema`, `function`. Shape tools include create-rectangle, create-ellipse, create-text, create-path, create-board, modify-*, create-boolean, group-shapes, align-shapes, interactions, flows, design tokens (get/create/modify/apply), draw-icon, and more.

See [docs/EXTENDING_TOOLS.md](docs/EXTENDING_TOOLS.md) for how to add new tools.

### RAG Tools

RAG tools search vector databases (Orama) for documentation. Databases are generated by [orama-persistence-generator](https://github.com/axelseis/orama-persistence-generator) and placed in `public/`. Existing RAGs: penpot-user-guide, design-styles. Embedding models: Orama (browser) or OpenAI (precomputed).

See [docs/CREATING_RAGS.md](docs/CREATING_RAGS.md) for creating and adding RAG tools.

### Plugin Communication

The UI sends queries via `postMessage` using `ClientQueryType`. Handlers live in `mainHandlers.js` and `drawHandlers/` (folder with specialized handlers). To add a new operation: define a ClientQueryType, implement a handler, and create a tool that calls `sendMessageToPlugin`.

See [docs/PLUGIN_COMMUNICATION.md](docs/PLUGIN_COMMUNICATION.md) for the full protocol and examples.

### Shape Reference

Shapes use schemas from `src/types/shapeTypes.js`: fills (color, gradient, image), strokes, shadows, blur, flex/grid layouts. Key rule: create foreground elements first, backgrounds last. Types: rectangle, ellipse, path, text.

See [docs/SHAPE_REFERENCE.md](docs/SHAPE_REFERENCE.md) for schema details.

### Path Commands

Path shapes use a `content` array of commands (M, L, H, V, C, S, Q, T, A, Z). Use `pathCommandsToSvgString()` in the plugin to convert to SVG.

See [docs/PATH_COMMANDS_GUIDE.md](docs/PATH_COMMANDS_GUIDE.md) for syntax and examples.

---

## Development

Scripts: `npm run dev` (UI only), `npm run dev:penpot` (plugin + watch), `npm run build`, `npm run test`, `npm run lint`. Project structure: `src/assets` (agents, tools), `src/plugin` (Penpot handlers), `src/stores` (state), `src/types` (schemas).

See [docs/DEVELOPMENT.md](docs/DEVELOPMENT.md) for full setup and structure.

---

## Troubleshooting

| Issue | Solution |
|-------|----------|
| **"Not connected"** | Check API key, click "Check API Keys", verify credits |
| **Streaming stops** | Check network, rate limits, reload plugin |
| **Tool not available** | Verify tool ID in agent's `toolIds`, reload plugin |
| **RAG returns nothing** | Ensure .zip in `public/`, use specific English queries |
| **Path drawing error** | Use valid path commands, ensure `Z` has no params; see [PATH_COMMANDS_GUIDE.md](docs/PATH_COMMANDS_GUIDE.md) |
| **Plugin not loading** | Rebuild with `npm run build`, check `dist/`, re-add plugin in Penpot |

---

## Resources

- [Penpot Plugin API](https://help.penpot.app/technical-guide/plugins/)
- [Vercel AI SDK](https://sdk.vercel.ai/docs)
- [nanostores](https://github.com/nanostores/nanostores)
- [Orama](https://docs.oramasearch.com/)
- [Zod](https://zod.dev/)

---

## License & Contributing

This project is licensed under the MIT License. For contributions, please read the contribution guidelines and submit pull requests.
